#!/usr/bin/perl
# Copyright 2007-2009 Marcin Owsiany <marcin@owsiany.pl>
# See the README file for license information
use strict;
use warnings;

=head1 NAME

mamgal - a program for creating static image galleries

=cut

use App::MaMGal;
App::MaMGal->new('')->make_roots($ARGV[0]);

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  mamgal <directory>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

mamgal recursively scans a directory and turns it into a gallery, that is
- creates HTML files for browsing pictures within this directory. If the
directory already contains a gallery, it tries to run as fast as possible, by
only refreshing the files that it needs to, based on file modification
timestamps.

When successful, mamgal prints nothing and exits 0.

=head2 Features

MaMGal was inspired by imageindex(1) and as such aims for a similar featureset
but higher efficiency and better code architecture.

=over

=item *

Index and slide views, simple layouts.

=item *

Image captions extracted from comments embedded in images themselves. This way
your photo descriptions will never get lost.

=item *

Static HTML output, no need for PHP or other server-side execution support.

=item *

Designed with efficiency in mind - only reads and processes the files which
were modified since the last run.

=item *

Image creation time extracted from EXIF metadata.

=back

=head2 Supported images

For the purpose of creating icons and slides, MaMGal supports the same images
as ImageMagick and the same films as mplayer.  However it decides whether a
file is an image, film or something else, based on file extension. Please report
any file extensions that should be treated as an image or film, but are not.

=head2 Created files

In each directory mamgal creates an 'index.html' and a number of hidden files
and directories whose names start with '.mamgal-':

=over

=item .mamgal-root

an empty marker file placed in the gallery root directory

=item .mamgal-slides

a directory containing HTML files presenting one image each

=item .mamgal-medium

a directory containing images scaled to be viewable on screen when shown within the slides

=item .mamgal-thumbnails

a directory containing "iconized" versions of images

=item .mamgal-index.png

a montage image showing the contents of the given directory

=item .mamgal-style.css

a stylesheet for the HTML files in the given directory

=item .mamgal-tmp

a temporary file that might be left over from a crash

=back

=head2 Performance

MaMGal was designed with efficiency in mind, for example:

=over

=item *

loads image data or metadata lazily, only when (and if) it needs it,

=item *

only processes files when it needs to refresh or create an output file when it
is stale or missing,

=item *

runs as a single process, does not reexecute itself when recursing,

=item *

uses Perl calls and ImageMagick library to load and scale images, create and
delete files, rather than executing external shell commands to do this (mplayer
being the only exception).

=back

Here is some example data of processing 15GB worth of images (9100 files in a
tree of 528 directories), compared to imageindex(1):

=over

=item generating a gallery from scratch:

=over

=item imageindex:

3 hours, 96%CPU usage, 170K major + 227M minor pagefaults

=item mamgal:

1.5 hours, 92%CPU usage, 146K major + 102M minor pagefaults

=back

=item re-run on a freshly generated gallery:

=over

=item imageindex:

51 minutes, 89%CPU usage, 155K major + 103M minor pagefaults

=item mamgal:

3.5 minutes, 58%CPU usage, 115 major + 1.7M minor pagefaults

=back

=back

=head2 Name and History

MaMGal stands for "Marcin and Magda Gallery", as it was initially written to
create my and my then-fianc√©e's photo collection. In the past I had been using
imageindex(1) for that, but with time our collection grew too large to be
processed with it in a timely manner, as imageindex took its time to read each
picture on every run. Therefore I came up with an idea for a gallery program
that would only process pictures that changed since the last run, and had a
test suite that would make it safer to modify.

=head1 SECURITY

MaMGal trusts the files it reads. It currently does not properly escape all
input read from the images before embedding it in the files it produces,
potentially leading to XSS-like vulnerabilities, if the input files are coming
from an untrusted source. This will probably be improved in the future.

=head1 CAVEATS

=head2 Root directory

Note that the directory specified on the command line is treated as the root of
the gallery, that is a directory that has no links to its parent directory.
Therefore to refresh a gallery you always need to run mamgal with the root
directory as an argument. (Otherwise, the subdirectory you specify will itself
turn into a root directory.)

=head1 AUTHOR

MaMGal is Copyright 2007-2009 Marcin Owsiany <marcin@owsiany.pl>

=head1 SEE ALSO

mplayer(1), jhead(1), imageindex(1), Image::Info(3), Image::ExifTool(3)

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

Please see the README file for more copyright and license information.

=cut

